Motivation is the willingness of an individual to put intense and persistent effort towards achieving the desired goal. Frederick Irving Herzberg gave the Two-Factor Theory of motivation, also known as the Hygiene-Motivator Theory. He emphasises on 2 facets of motivation and separates dissatisfaction and satisfaction on two different planes. these are described below:

1) Hygiene Factors- These factors are based on the context of the job while focusing on extrinsic motivators. Hygiene factors avoid dissatisfaction but not necessarily lead to satisfaction and motivation among the employees. Absence of these actors result in dissatisfaction. Examples of such factors includes, salary, working conditions, electricity, interpersonal relationships,etc.

2) Motivators- These factors on the other hand, are based on the content of the job and focus on intrinsic motivation of the employee. Herzberg says that, it is these motivators which lead to satisfaction true motivation and the willingness to work in the employee. Absence of these factors result in No satisfaction. Examples include, recognition, growth opportunities.....

Individual Personality influence:

Herzberg puts emphasis on the importance of individual personalities also playing a role in such a differentiation. 

1) some individuals can be motivation seekers who want to achieve more in life.
2) others can be maintenance-seekers who are more interested i the hygiene factors.

Implications of the two-factor theory:

The Two-Factor Theory has various implications in real life. Managers should make sure hat hygiene factors are provided to the employees while also ensuring that appropriate motivators are present for the growth of the workers to make them motivated. For example, Google provides good salary and working conditions on one side while also making sure that employees get growth opportunities (platforms theek se yaad nhi) .


Limitations:

This theory also comes with its own set of limitations:

1) Over simplification: This separation of the two facets of motivation is too simplified and overlooks on various complexities in real life. 

2) Individual differences: Salary can be a hygiene factor for one person while being a motivator for the other. 

3) Small research sample with no diversity: Herzberg came up with this theory by researching on a number of engineers and accountants who are usually more internally driven. Such a theory may not be applicable for the lower-level workers like those who work in factories and prefer factors like salary more than growth opportunities.

Frederick Herzberg's theory of motivation, despite it limitations is one of the famous content theories of motivation which separated the concept of satisfaction and dissatisfaction. It provides the managers with a model and reminds them to focus on the motivators while also providing the hygiene factors to their employees.